Title: I wonder what to do about the &quot;laptops not cl...
Date: 2009-10-09 05:35
Author: spiv (noreply@blogger.com)
Slug: meta-meeting-stuff/3306118758545015894

I wonder what to do about the "laptops not closed" problem. I guess the
solution depends on the cause...  
  
*Email genuinely backing up and needs to be dealt with?* That certainly
sounds plausible after several days. Allocate some time for catching up
on demands from the outside world.  
  
*Meeting fatigue — after several days of intense discussion perhaps some
people's capacity for engaging in intense discussion is simply
exhausted?* Not sure what to do about this except for taking more time
or doing less, neither of which is satisfactory. Or finding a way when
planning the week to accomodate the inevitable reduced energy towards
the end, e.g. shorter sessions and more breaks?  
  
*Some participants don't think the current topic is very relevant to
them, or that their involvement is superfluous?* There's a pretty
important disconnect there... why did they attend in the first place,
and why were they invited? If circumstances have changed since the
meeting attendees were chosen then maybe there needs to be a way for
people to gracefully uninvite themselves.  
  
Put another way, if someone's laptop is not closed, why don't they just
excuse themselves and leave the room entirely? Perhaps there's no just
obvious way to do that politely. Or perhaps they feel obliged to be
there, but simultaneously don't agree that it's a good use of their time
(maybe just because they have meeting fatigue). That's a pretty serious
problem, and definitely a vibe-sucking one, and I'd love to know a good
solution.  
  
Maybe next time quietly approach a culprit during a break and ask them
as non-judgementally as possible why they've started opening their
laptop during a meeting?

