Title: I feel like these are all kind of sad little worka...
Date: 2008-11-16 01:56
Author: glyph (noreply@blogger.com)
Slug: review-thoughts/3762152742188556017

I feel like these are all kind of sad little workarounds for what I
believe we all really want.  
  
When I'm going to review a branch, I want to get a side-by-side diff
view *where I actually write code*, i.e. Emacs, that looks something
like Meld. I want to have the merged code in my working copy so that I
can run unit tests locally. Ideally, I'd like to have that same UI for
transparently running the code on the buildbots as well, but we're
getting pretty far afield into fantasy at that point...  
  
I want to be able to annotate the changes by indicating them directly
and typing them next to the changed region of code. Then, when I'm done
writing comments... I just want to push a button and send the review! I
don't want to screw around with my mail client, push buttons on a web
page, or anything like that.  
  
Guido's code review stuff (is codereview.appspot.com the same as
Rietveld?) and reviewboard both kinda-sorta get this done, but with a
god-awful amount of mousing around. The "Show 10 Above / Show 10 Below"
thing on codereview.appspot.com is a hilarious example of how bad this
gets. I don't want to see "10 more lines" of diff, I want to know what
goddamn class definition this method is a part of!  
  
Anything that involves chopping up unstructured unified-diff content and
reading it or writing about it is sucky. Anything that separates the
code from the diff from the ticket from the review is sucky. I can
definitely see the advantages of doing things the Canonical way, but I
can also see the immense disadvantages of trying to cram the immense
suckage of email into the already sucky world of code review.  
  
Personally an emerging feature I like about Twisted's review process is
that reviewers are starting to use enumerated lists rather than bullet
points, so it's easy to refer to a point in subsequent comments and
re-reviews. But, in the system I'd really like to be using, that would
all be automatic.

