Title: I may have made my argument too strongly.<br><br>I...
Date: 2008-11-17 01:32
Author: glyph (noreply@blogger.com)
Slug: review-thoughts/8583996537367579331

I may have made my argument too strongly.  
  
I can definitely see some advantages to using email. Having dealt with a
couple of your reviews written in this style now, I can appreciate its
subjective impact, at least a little. Personally I find it a wash with
the way that I'm doing things now.  
  
Your comment about feedback like "there are some coding standard issues"
is well-taken. This is a pretty crappy form of comment, and we should
try to keep that in mind ourselves and also educate other reviewers
about what constitutes a good comment. I don't think this actually has
anything to do with the tools, because I've gotten (and written) lots of
reviews that don't make that mistake.  
  
My favorite kind of review is where everything is phrased in terms of
FQPNs; there is a button in my editor which can (sort of) take me
directly to the definition of an FQPN, so it's a very quick copy/paste.  
  
My main point, though, is that these are both rough approximations of
what we actually want. You don't want to type into the middle of a hunk
of diff; I don't want to copy and paste an FQPN into some bespoke secret
elisp. We both want to abstractly indicate a region of changed code and
annotate it during the review process, then send those annotations back
to the author in a format where they can easily see them.  
  
I can see how emailing commentary on diffs more closely approximates
this ideal for you. For me, it does not, and I prefer ticket comments
with module names in them. But let's not lose sight of the fact that
both experiences are terrible next to being able to push a button in
your editor and see the next feedback comment you have to deal with,
right next to the code that the feedback is on.  
  
If you have a mechanism to jump directly to a region of code in emacs
based on a mangled / email-quoted diff, though, I'd be very interested
:).

