Title: Code without a documented API is incomplete, in th...
Date: 2010-05-01 11:12
Author: jkakar (noreply@blogger.com)
Slug: i-dont-want-to-talk-about-documentation/5095859175069847602

Code without a documented API is incomplete, in the same way that it is
without tests. Documenting the tests clearly is also important. Like
you, I typically write the docstring for a test before I write it. On
the topic of API documentation, I far too often see comments that
describe what the code does, instead of what its purpose is. I can read
the code to see what it does, but often that doesn't help me understand
what its purpose is. Writing good API documentation is a skill.  
  
At a previous job it was mandated that a specification must be written
before doing any coding. It was ridiculous, because it wasn't really
about discovering the domain, but about documenting the classes you
would be implementing. These specifications were expected to include UML
diagrams to show class hierarchies, the sequence of calls that would be
made to satisfy (very poorly identified) use cases. It was horrible. In
the beginning I tried to comply but quickly realized that this was a
complete waste of time: it was super boring and the code I ended up
writing never matched the specification.  
  
I think this kind of documentation about code is pointless. It's another
artifact to maintain and inevitably it gets out of date. That said, I do
find high-level documentation useful. In many cases these are diagrams.
For example, an architecture diagram showing, at a high-level, the
components in a system and how they interact can be very enlightening.
It's often that high-level perspective that is hard to determine by
reading code. Also, documentation that describes user stories and
provides context about the domain can be useful. In most cases I find a
list of 'As a X I want to Y so that Z' stories adequate. I just want
something to help me get into the problem space, I don't need tons of
prose.  
  
One interesting thing at the previous job where there was a push for
detailed specifications is that the programmers there felt reading code
was too hard. They didn't want to do it, they weren't good at it and so
they would look for documentation as a way to figure it out. There was
no review process there. When I first got involved with reviews I
realized how poor my reading skills were... having been doing it for a
while, my ability to dive into code and read and comprehend it has
improved immensely.  
  
I don't think we should be proud of a lack of documentation. I think we
should determine what kind of documentation is useful, write it and then
produce no more. Documenting everything we possibly can is a bad idea.

