Title: The first thing I think after reading this post is...
Date: 2010-11-16 16:15
Author: Sense Hofstede (noreply@blogger.com)
Slug: and-then-what/5016531907366722606

The first thing I think after reading this post is: great work,
Launchpad Team! You've been doing an awesome job and if you look at
where Launchpad came from, so much has been improved.  
  
I have to admit that I am a bit of a semantic web fan, and I would love
to see more semantics coming to Launchpad, but I understand there are
more important things.  
  
The things you mention in your post look great, and I agree with your
plans to (somewhat) merge Blueprints and Bugs. Changing the name of the
bug tracker to Issue Tracker would already be an improvement, because it
would be more inclusive and describe better the possible uses of the
tracker.  
  
Because bug tracking is being used for more things than just plain
software bugs. There is a Launchpad project that contains bug reports
concerning community issues. Many LoCos, including mine, use Launchpad
to manage tasks in the bug tracker. The most notable example, though,
would be the One Hundred Paper Cuts project. It is used for reporting
bugs that are in fact mostly usability issues. They require a bit more
discussion and are not (always) exactly bugs. (More information about
what constitutes a paper cut can be found at .)  
It would be great if these other uses of the bug/issue tracker would be
considered during the design of the (partial?) merge of the blueprint
and bug trackers.  
  
Another issue we see is the fact that the Ubuntu community and Canonical
created several different projects on Launchpad to manage subprojects of
the Ubuntu project. It is not possible to make a link between the
'ubuntu' distribution type project on Launchpad and its subprojects,
like 'ubuntu-community', 'hundredpapercuts' and others. This has the
consequence that the 'ubuntu' project on Launchpad only contains bugs
and source and translations of the packages in the main repositories.
But there is more to the project! It would be great if Launchpad could
make the other aspects of the community more visible by allowing to link
projects together.  
  
I think that something else that would increase clarity and make the
project pages on Launchpad more useful would be displaying roles on the
front and section pages. Currently Launchpad already has some roles
displayed (Driver, Maintainer, Bug Supervisor and such), but these are
limited and do not cover the full community. Instead, or in addition to
this, Launchpad could allow projects to create roles/functions (with a
unique (per-project) slug for API authentication purposes) and assign
teams or persons to it. This would give visitors (and, if the proper
semantics would be used, also bots ;)) a way to find out who is
responsible for what and contact them and. be an authoritative source
for this kind of information.  
  
Also, if you would do away with the set roles that give permissions,
like Driver or Maintainer, you could create a much more flexible
permission system by allowing project maintainers to assign capabilities
to roles. Instead of the Bug Supervisor being shown at the bug tracker
page, you would see the roles that have bug-related capabilities there.
This would allow every project to complete customise its permissions.  
  
Especially now Launchpad is used more and more as a provider for
authentication and permissions such a system would increase Launchpad's
value as a platform to offer this information.  
  
These are some ideas that came up in me/I remembered. I hope you like
them, or at least that they help you with getting (even more!) ideas for
Launchpad's future.

