Title: ... and another thing.
Date: 2010-09-08 20:19
Author: glyph (noreply@blogger.com)
Slug: why-you-should-write-your-tests-first/3206176607002629967

... and another thing.  
  
There is one case where not writing tests first is actually a better
idea, I think.  
  
If you have some code with a lot of dependencies and no test support for
those dependencies (where "test support" means mocks, fakes, stubs,
in-memory implementations, or what-have-you), sometimes TDD means that
you have to start off by writing a largeish pile of unmaintainable
one-off junk just to stub out enough to get a simple test running.  
  
I go back and forth on this, but I am coming to be of the opinion that
having big piles of unmaintainable test stubs *can* be a worse problem
than having poor coverage. The stubs and functionality and interfaces
can diverge from the "real" implementations, and inevitably you end up
having to maintain a couple dozen fake implementations of the
not-really-test-supported interfaces, each of which has its own quirks.
This can lead to lots of false failures, which leads to decreased trust
in the test suite, which is of course bad.  
  
If you're adding functionality to a system, you can usually manage this
problem by implementing the new functionality itself in a corner, with
only the dependencies that it really needs, and keep the test
maintenance burden sane. Rather than try to make sure that the
integration code is properly TDD, the goal is then to just keep the
integration code (which glues your shiny new TDD-developed module into
the system) as small as possible.  
  
This is really just a restatement of "minimize untestable code", but I
take issue with that phrasing, because it's defeatist (especially in a
nice, dynamic language like Python). *All* code is testable: this
strategy should be a temporary measure as you work towards developing
*good* test support for your "untestable" interfaces and thinning out
unnecessary coupling. I think that it may be worthwhile to do some
planning and architecture around your test development as well as your
main body of code.

