Title: This seems like it could use a little expanding; i...
Date: 2010-09-08 19:57
Author: glyph (noreply@blogger.com)
Slug: why-you-should-write-your-tests-first/5119528839421413108

This seems like it could use a little expanding; it seems to be written
for an audience that mostly understands what you're talking about
already, and will just evoke familiar pangs rather than really educate.
*Why* is code-and-cover dull? You write the same tests and code either
way, right? Why is it harder to get full coverage? You just write your
tests and then run your coverage tool, of course.  
  
I think that there are a lot of folks out there who do code-and-cover
but don't really know why it's not as good as TDD. A more expansive post
would benefit them quite a bit.  
  
(Of course, *I* know the answers, as do many of your readers, but I'm
too lazy to write a good post in response, so I'm hoping you'll do it
for me ;-)).  
  
For my part, I do sometimes have trouble getting tests first, mostly in
not-fully-covered code that has a big pile of existing dependencies that
don't have test mocks, and building out even the most trivial test
infrastructure would take substantially longer than just fixing a simple
bug. However, when I do get around to fixing it "for real", I try to
avoid the code-and-cover mistake of writing a test that passes first: I
cut the whole implementation into another file, write a test, and get it
to fail first, then start re-importing the smallest bits I need to get
my test passing. Once I'm in the TDD groove again, I will quite often
spot uncovered or buggy chunks of functionality and get them fixed
right.  
  
The few times I have tried to just write tests for existing code without
modifying it so that it will fail, it's been a complete mess.

