Title: I don&#39;t think that you can actually model the ...
Date: 2010-11-30 21:52
Author: glyph (noreply@blogger.com)
Slug: big-or-small/4671967371627585114

I don't think that you can actually model the distinction between
different types of projects as "small" vs. "big". Granted, it's a
popular dichotomy, but that doesn't mean it's not a false one :).  
  
For example: for many projects, "smaller" is better. But Twisted's
attempt to go from "big" to "small", as spiv notes, was a disaster
(although not an unqualified one). The further we pushed it, the more
duplication of process was created. If we had continued to really break
out all the subprojects fully, I suspect that most of them would be
completely moribund now. For example: if a change to core which broke
conch didn't alert us immediately to that fact, it would be *years*
before anybody got around to fixing it, probably past the point where
all hope would be lost that it was fixable at all. Does this really have
anything to do with big vs. small? Not really, it's more a question of
shared vs. duplicated build infrastructure.  
  
Another way to look at this problem is: projects aren't small or big,
it's that they fit into some conceptual model and possibly also provide
one themselves. The real question of how to organize things is more
about what those relationships are than about the absolute size of the
project.  
  
For example: "small tools that do one thing well" is frequently extolled
as a key part of the UNIX philosophy. Yet, many of those "small" tools
have intimate dependencies on a gigantic pile of infrastructure that the
*huge* lower-level projects, such as the kernel, X.org, glibc, et. al.
provide.  
  
The best projects are the ones which provide a firm core and strong
conventions upon which may be built a wide variety of tools which follow
those conventions, and be seamlessly integrated according to them. This
is what Twisted aims to be; its 'bigness' is mostly a result of the fact
that 'smallness' requires a per-project duplication of effort which,
with a small development team, we have empirically demonstrated we can't
afford.

